packer/README.md, before:

[//]: # (vim: filetype=markdown ts=4 sw=4 et)
[//]: # (-*- coding: utf-8 -*-)
[//]: # (Comment formatting by https://stackoverflow.com/a/20885980)

# Cloud Build Packer

This Cloud Build job builds a Google Compute Engine image containing Globus
Connect Server.  The intention is for the image to be used to run Globus
Connect Server endpoints with Google Cloud Storage or Google Drive connectors.

In addition to installing Globus Connect Server, this Cloud Build job does some
additional stuff:

* Do an `apt-get update`, to install any updates released since the base image
  was created.

* Install a simple static HTML file to serve on port 80 (even though nobody
  should be accessing port 80).

* Install the Google Cloud monitoring agent, so that metrics like memory usage
  may be recorded & displayed in the Monitoring tab for VMs in Compute Engine.

  Note that this agent only works if the Stackdriver Monitoring API is enabled.

Additional functionality will likely be added in the future.

# Requirements

## Cloud Build

This Cloud Build job's container image needs to be built by the
`packer_builder` Cloud Build job, which should be defined elsewhere within this
repository.

This job assumes that the `packer_builder` job is in the project's Google
Compute Registry, and is named `packer`.

## APIs

To use this, you need the Google Cloud Storage, IAM Credentials, and Cloud
Build APIs.  You can enable all of the required APIs with these commands:

    gcloud services enable storage-component.googleapis.com
    gcloud services enable storage-api.googleapis.com
    gcloud services enable cloudresourcemanager.googleapis.com
    gcloud services enable iamcredentials.googleapis.com
    gcloud services enable cloudbuild.googleapis.com

Before you can enable all of the above APIs, you will need to set up billing on
your project.  Each API may take a few minutes to enable.

## Cloud Storage Bucket

The Cloud Build process requires a Google Cloud Storage bucket.

The bucket has a specific name requirement: The bucket name **must** be the
project ID followed by the string `_cloudbuild`.  So, if the project ID is
`abc`, the bucket name must be `abc_cloudbuild`.  This requirement is because
manual Cloud Build builds need a bucket to hold the build source, and this is
the default name for that bucket.

`gcloud build` upload objects are stored in the `/source` 'directory'.

Every build will upload two files into the `/artifacts/build-lists`
'directory', within a subdirectory whose name is the name of the built image:

* `dpkg_pkglist.txt` is a list of Debian packages installed.

* `pip_pkglist.txt` is a list of pip-installed Python packages in the
  `/opt/gcs_gcp` Python virtual environment.

The bucket should have Lifecycle rules in place to automatically clean up
objects after some period of time.  The suggested rules are to archive after a
month, and delete after 1-2 years.

## Service Account

A Service Account is required for Packer to run.  In operation, Packer is
started with different permissions (for example, a regular user's credentials,
or the Cloud Build Default Service Account), and then uses
[impersonation](https://cloud.google.com/iam/docs/impersonating-service-accounts)
to act as the Packer Service Account.

The benefit of this method is, you only need to set fine-grained permissions on
the Packer Service Account, instead of on all of the accounts that might
possibly run Packer.

The downside of using impersonation is that
[OS Login](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/oslogin) may not be used.  The
API used to upload a key for OS Login takes the 

## Permissions

The Cloud Build Default Service Account needs two roles on the Packer
Service Account:

* `roles/iam.serviceAccountUser`

* `roles/iam.serviceAccountTokenCreator`

* `roles/Storage Object Viewer` on the Cloud Storage bucket, for all objects
  with paths beginning with `/source/`.  This is used to access any manual
  Cloud Build upload tarballs, which are created when performing a manual Cloud
  Build.

* `roles/Storage Object Creator` on the Cloud Storage bucket, for all objects
  with paths beginning with `/artifacts/`.  This is where artifacts of the
  build process will be uploaded.

The latter permission is needed due to how Packer does the impersonation.

The Packer Service Account needs a number of fine-grained permissions,
expressed as roles with permissions:

* `roles/iam.serviceAccountUser` on the Compute Engine Default Service Account.
  This is so that temporary instances may be launched with that service
  account.

* `roles/compute.viewer`.  This allows read-only access to Compute Engine
  information needed to launch a new VM.  This may be able to be locked down
  more.

* `roles/compute.instanceAdmin.v1`, full access only on instances in a specific
  zone where the instance name starts with "packer".  For this security to
  work, other instances (for example, production instances) must use names that
  do _not_ start with "packer".

* `roles/compute.instanceAdmin.v1`, full access only on disks in a specific
  zone where the disk name starts with "packer".

* `roles/compute.instanceAdmin.v1`, full access only on the Packer subnet.

* `roles/compute.instanceAdmin.v1`, full access to all images.  The intention
  is that Globus Connect Personal images—maintained by this builder—are the
  only images in the project.

# Parameters

To use Packer, you need to set these parameters:

* `_GCR_REGION` is the region of Google Container Registry where the Packer
  image may be found.  You can specify 'us', 'eu', or 'asia'.  It defaults to
  'us'.

* `_PACKER_TAG` is the container image tag to use.  This can either be a
  version number, or "latest".  The default is "latest".

* `_SERVICE_ACCOUNT_EMAIL` is the email address of the Packer Service Account.

* `_PACKER_FILE` is the name of the file, located in the same directory as this
  file, which Packer will use for build instructions.  It defaults to
  "globus.pkr.hcl".

* `_PACKER_DIR` is the path where the Packer files are located.  It defaults to
  "packer", the current directory.  The Packer build involves copying files
  located elsewhere in the workspace, so the build is run from the root of the
  workspace, which means we need to tell Packer to look for config files in a
  sub-directory of the repisotory.

* `_ZONE` is the name of the Compute Engine zone where Packer will temporarily
  create Compute Engine disks and VM instances.  This needs to match the zone
  specified in the fine-grained permissions for the Packer Service Account.

* `_SUBNET` is the name of the VPC Subnet where the temporary Compute Engine VM
  instances will be created.  This needs to be in the region where you zone
  resides.

  Also, this subnet must have a firewall rule that allows SSH connections in
  from Cloud Build.  Unfortunately, it is not possible to put Cloud Build into
  a specific subnet, and Google does not specify a set list of public IPs for
  Cloud Build; until that happens, the firewall rule will need to allow SSH
  from all Google Cloud IP addresses.

# Building

You can build this using a few different ways:

* **Triggers**: This is the preferred method for automation.  Set up a trigger
  that activates whenever something of interest happens, such as a push to a
  branch.  The trigger should explicitly use a Cloud Build configuration file,
  and you will need to provide the path to it (`packer/cloudbuild.yaml`).

  With this method, you can override default parameters in the trigger
  configuration.  There are also some paraneters that have no default, and so
  you will need to provide a substitution.

* **Manually**: In a terminal, navigate to the parent directory and run `gcloud
  builds submit --config=packer/cloudbuild.yaml .`.

  With this method, you can override parameters on the command line, like so:
  `gcloud builds submit --config=packer/cloudbuild.yaml
  --substitutions=_PACKER_TAG=1.7.0,_GCR_REGION=asia .`.

Note that in both cases, you will need to provide substitutions for
`_SERVICE_ACCOUNT_EMAIL`, `_ZONE`, and `_SUBNET`.  If you fail to do so, manual
builds will not launch, and triggered builds will fail.

# Outputs

This build does not create any images or artifacts as Cloud Build knows them.
Instead, this build will create a Compute Engine image in the "globus" family.
The name of the image will be "globus-" followed by a timestamp.

Note that this build does not do anything to old images.  You will need to
implement some way of deprecating, obsoleting, and deleting old images.

Commit message:

packer: Post Pub/Sub notification on completion
When Packer is done building a new Compute Engine image, post a message to a
Pub/Sub Topic.  The message is a JSON object, containing the key `image_name`,
whose value is the name of the just-created Compute Engine image.

This takes advantage of the new Google Cloud SDK container image, that we are
using as the base for the Packer image.  `gcloud` is called to publish the
message.

For this to work, a new Packer variable, `pubsub_topic`, is required: This is
the name of the Pub/Sub Topic.  Similarly, a new `_PUBSUB_TOPIC` substitution
is created, which does *not* have a default.

packer/README.md, after:

[//]: # (vim: filetype=markdown ts=4 sw=4 et)
[//]: # (-*- coding: utf-8 -*-)
[//]: # (Comment formatting by https://stackoverflow.com/a/20885980)

# Cloud Build Packer

This Cloud Build job builds a Google Compute Engine image containing Globus
Connect Server.  The intention is for the image to be used to run Globus
Connect Server endpoints with Google Cloud Storage or Google Drive connectors.

In addition to installing Globus Connect Server, this Cloud Build job does some
additional stuff:

* Do an `apt-get update`, to install any updates released since the base image
  was created.

* Install a simple static HTML file to serve on port 80 (even though nobody
  should be accessing port 80).

* Install the Google Cloud monitoring agent, so that metrics like memory usage
  may be recorded & displayed in the Monitoring tab for VMs in Compute Engine.

  Note that this agent only works if the Stackdriver Monitoring API is enabled.

Additional functionality will likely be added in the future.

# Requirements

## Cloud Build

This Cloud Build job's container image needs to be built by the
`packer_builder` Cloud Build job, which should be defined elsewhere within this
repository.

This job assumes that the `packer_builder` job is in the project's Google
Compute Registry, and is named `packer`.

## APIs

To use this, you need the Google Cloud Storage, IAM Credentials, and Cloud
Build APIs.  You can enable all of the required APIs with these commands:

    gcloud services enable storage-component.googleapis.com
    gcloud services enable storage-api.googleapis.com
    gcloud services enable cloudresourcemanager.googleapis.com
    gcloud services enable iamcredentials.googleapis.com
    gcloud services enable pubsub.googleapis.com
    gcloud services enable cloudbuild.googleapis.com

Before you can enable all of the above APIs, you will need to set up billing on
your project.  Each API may take a few minutes to enable.

## Cloud Storage Bucket

The Cloud Build process requires a Google Cloud Storage bucket.

The bucket has a specific name requirement: The bucket name **must** be the
project ID followed by the string `_cloudbuild`.  So, if the project ID is
`abc`, the bucket name must be `abc_cloudbuild`.  This requirement is because
manual Cloud Build builds need a bucket to hold the build source, and this is
the default name for that bucket.

`gcloud build` upload objects are stored in the `/source` 'directory'.

Every build will upload two files into the `/artifacts/build-lists`
'directory', within a subdirectory whose name is the name of the built image:

* `dpkg_pkglist.txt` is a list of Debian packages installed.

* `pip_pkglist.txt` is a list of pip-installed Python packages in the
  `/opt/gcs_gcp` Python virtual environment.

The bucket should have Lifecycle rules in place to automatically clean up
objects after some period of time.  The suggested rules are to archive after a
month, and delete after 1-2 years.

# Pub/Sub Topic

When the image has been pushed, a message is published to a Google Cloud
Pub/Sub Topic.  This can be used to trigger other code, to do things like
update Compute Engine VM Templates, or send an email notification of a
successful build.

The published message will contain a JSON object with one key, `image_name`.
The value will be the name of the newly-created Compue Engine image.

## Service Account

A Service Account is required for Packer to run.  In operation, Packer is
started with different permissions (for example, a regular user's credentials,
or the Cloud Build Default Service Account), and then uses
[impersonation](https://cloud.google.com/iam/docs/impersonating-service-accounts)
to act as the Packer Service Account.

The benefit of this method is, you only need to set fine-grained permissions on
the Packer Service Account, instead of on all of the accounts that might
possibly run Packer.

The downside of using impersonation is that
[OS Login](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/oslogin) may not be used.  The
API used to upload a key for OS Login takes the 

## Permissions

The Cloud Build Default Service Account needs the following roles on the Packer
Service Account:

* `roles/iam.serviceAccountUser`

* `roles/iam.serviceAccountTokenCreator`

* `roles/Storage Object Viewer` on the Cloud Storage bucket, for all objects
  with paths beginning with `/source/`.  This is used to access any manual
  Cloud Build upload tarballs, which are created when performing a manual Cloud
  Build.

* `roles/Storage Object Creator` on the Cloud Storage bucket, for all objects
  with paths beginning with `/artifacts/`.  This is where artifacts of the
  build process will be uploaded.

* In the permissions for the Pub/Sub Topic, the `roles/pubsub.publisher` role.

The latter permission is needed due to how Packer does the impersonation.

The Packer Service Account needs a number of fine-grained permissions,
expressed as roles with permissions:

* `roles/iam.serviceAccountUser` on the Compute Engine Default Service Account.
  This is so that temporary instances may be launched with that service
  account.

* `roles/compute.viewer`.  This allows read-only access to Compute Engine
  information needed to launch a new VM.  This may be able to be locked down
  more.

* `roles/compute.instanceAdmin.v1`, full access only on instances in a specific
  zone where the instance name starts with "packer".  For this security to
  work, other instances (for example, production instances) must use names that
  do _not_ start with "packer".

* `roles/compute.instanceAdmin.v1`, full access only on disks in a specific
  zone where the disk name starts with "packer".

* `roles/compute.instanceAdmin.v1`, full access only on the Packer subnet.

* `roles/compute.instanceAdmin.v1`, full access to all images.  The intention
  is that Globus Connect Personal images—maintained by this builder—are the
  only images in the project.

# Parameters

To use Packer, you need to set these parameters:

* `_GCR_REGION` is the region of Google Container Registry where the Packer
  image may be found.  You can specify 'us', 'eu', or 'asia'.  It defaults to
  'us'.

* `_PACKER_TAG` is the container image tag to use.  This can either be a
  version number, or "latest".  The default is "latest".

* `_SERVICE_ACCOUNT_EMAIL` is the email address of the Packer Service Account.

* `_PUBSUB_TOPIC` is the name of a Pub/Sub Topic.

* `_PACKER_FILE` is the name of the file, located in the same directory as this
  file, which Packer will use for build instructions.  It defaults to
  "globus.pkr.hcl".

* `_PACKER_DIR` is the path where the Packer files are located.  It defaults to
  "packer", the current directory.  The Packer build involves copying files
  located elsewhere in the workspace, so the build is run from the root of the
  workspace, which means we need to tell Packer to look for config files in a
  sub-directory of the repisotory.

* `_ZONE` is the name of the Compute Engine zone where Packer will temporarily
  create Compute Engine disks and VM instances.  This needs to match the zone
  specified in the fine-grained permissions for the Packer Service Account.

* `_SUBNET` is the name of the VPC Subnet where the temporary Compute Engine VM
  instances will be created.  This needs to be in the region where you zone
  resides.

  Also, this subnet must have a firewall rule that allows SSH connections in
  from Cloud Build.  Unfortunately, it is not possible to put Cloud Build into
  a specific subnet, and Google does not specify a set list of public IPs for
  Cloud Build; until that happens, the firewall rule will need to allow SSH
  from all Google Cloud IP addresses.

# Building

You can build this using a few different ways:

* **Triggers**: This is the preferred method for automation.  Set up a trigger
  that activates whenever something of interest happens, such as a push to a
  branch.  The trigger should explicitly use a Cloud Build configuration file,
  and you will need to provide the path to it (`packer/cloudbuild.yaml`).

  With this method, you can override default parameters in the trigger
  configuration.  There are also some paraneters that have no default, and so
  you will need to provide a substitution.

* **Manually**: In a terminal, navigate to the parent directory and run `gcloud
  builds submit --config=packer/cloudbuild.yaml .`.

  With this method, you can override parameters on the command line, like so:
  `gcloud builds submit --config=packer/cloudbuild.yaml
  --substitutions=_PACKER_TAG=1.7.0,_GCR_REGION=asia .`.

Note that in both cases, you will need to provide substitutions for
`_PUBSUB_TOPIC`, `_SERVICE_ACCOUNT_EMAIL`, `_ZONE`, and `_SUBNET`.  If you fail
to do so, manual builds will not launch, and triggered builds will fail.

# Outputs

This build does not create any images or artifacts as Cloud Build knows them.
Instead, this build will create a Compute Engine image in the "globus" family.
The name of the image will be "globus-" followed by a timestamp.

Note that this build does not do anything to old images.  You will need to
implement some way of deprecating, obsoleting, and deleting old images.
